Welcome to ITECH190: Intro To Computer Science

Instructor: Justin Cox
Email: justin.cox@lltc.edu
Office: Bullpen #1
Discord: Pandadadx7
Office Hours: By Appoinment

Class Times: Tuesdays and Thursdays, 9:00am to 10:15am
Classroom: 111

Required Materials:
Book: Crossing The River with Dogs 3rd Edition By Ken Johnson, Ted Herr, & Judy Kysh, ISBN: 978-1-1192-7509-1

Github:  All students will be creating a Github account and taught how to use it during the first lab. Git will
        be pre-installed on campus machines. Installation guieds for personal machines can be found at:
        https://git-scm.com/ 

VSCode: This is the text editor we will be using for this class.  It will be pre-installed on campus machines.
        Installation guides for personal machines can be found at:
        https://code.visualstudio.com/

Python: This is the programming language you will be learning in this class. It will be pre-installed on campus 
        machines.  Installation guides for personal machines can be found 
        at https://www.python.org/

What to expect from this class:
This class aims to do 2 things. 1) Teach students how to think / problem solve as copmuter scientists, and
2) how to use the Python programming language.  To accomplish this is actually fairly simple.  You just need to 
put in the time doing the things over and over.  The old adage of "don't do something until you get it right,
do it until you can't get it wrong." applies here.  While the topics covered in this class won't take hours 
upon hours to learn, it will take more than simply looking over it in the book.

Weekly Breakdown:
Tuesday: introduce the topic for the week, discuss it, and do several practice problems as a class.  Additional 
problems will be assigned as homework and they will be due the following Tuesday.

Thursday: Lab.  We will be focusing on learning the python programming language and implementing problem
solving techniques learned on Tuesday.  Any work not completed during the lab will be due the following Thursday.

Assignments:
All assignemnts will be handed in via Github.  Git version control is an important technology to get used to using 
so we will utilize it as our primary delivery method for assignments and labs.  The process for doing this and What
needs to be included with every assignment will be discussed during our first labs.

