Drawing A Diagram

Diagrams are often the key to getting started with problems.  They clarify 
complex relationships within the problem.  Architects, electrical engineers, 
construction workers, nearly all professions use diagrams in some way to
help them visualize problems and relationships.

Diagrams specifically help us visualize problems spatialy.  This allows 
the spacial reasoning parts of the brain to get more involved with 
solving the problem.  As well as helping us get a better handle on 
WHAT is actually being asked in the problem.

Basktball League:
Chapter 1, pg 12
Andrew and his friends have formed a fantasy basketball league in which each
team will play three games against each of the other teams.  There are seven 
teams: The Aggies, The Boilermakers, The Crimson Tide, The Ducks, The Eagles,
The Falcons, and the Gators.  How many games will be played in total?

Step 1: what is the problem REALLY asking of us?
In this case it is pretty straight forward.  We want to figure out how many
total games will be played if each team playes 3 games against each other team.
To solve this we can draw an image with 7 circles representing each of the 7
teams.  From there, we can draw a line between any two circles to represent the 
games between those two teams.  Once we have done this for all 7 teams, we can 
simply multiply the total number of lines by 3 to get our final answer.

Step 2: draw the problem.
First lets start by drawing out 7 circles to each of the teams. (Figure 1.1.1)
From there, lets draw a line conneting the first team to each of the other
teams. (Figure 1.1.2)  

Question:  how many lines were drawn?

Continue with the second team.  Draw a line connecting the second team to 
each of the other teams. (Figure 1.1.3) Notice you didn't need to draw a 
line connecting the second team to the first team since that was already
done by the first teams lines.

Question: How many new lines were drawn?
Question: How many total lines are there now?

Conitnue with the third team.  (Figure 1.1.4).  Again notice that you did 
not need to draw any lines to the first two teams since those have already been 
taken care of.  Go ahead and finish your drawing by completing all of the lines.

Exercise:  Complete the drawing.
Question: How many total lines were drawn?
Quetsion: What is the total number of games played?
Question: Did you notice a pattern emerge?
Question: If there were only 6 teams, could you quickly tell me how many games 
would have been played?  What abotu 10 teams?
Question: Can you generalize this pattern?

The Model Train:
Chapter 1, pg 15
Esther has a model train set up on a circular track.  6 telephone poles are spaced
evenly around the track. The engine of the train takes 10 seconds to go from the 
1st pole to the 3rd pole.  How long would it take the engine to go all the way 
around the track?

Step 1: what is the problem really asking us?
This one is seems pretty straight forward, and for the most part it is.  We want
to know how long it takes the front of the engine to travel around the circluar track.

Question:  Based on the information given, what is your first response? 

For many the first reaction would be 20 seconds.  Since it takes 10 seconds to go from
the first to the third light pole, and 3 is half of 6.  That means 10 seconds x 2 = 20 
seconds.  However that is not exactly right.  The answer will become more apparent 
once you draw out the problem.

Step 2: draw the problem.
Start by drawing out the circular track and mark down 6 light poles, and mark that it  
took 10 seconds to travel from pole 1 to pole 3. (Firgure 1.2.1).  Once it is drawn
out this way, it is easy to see that it did not cover half of the circle, so the original 
answer of 20 seconds can't be right.

Notice that the light poles, divide the train track into 6 distinct sections. (figure 1.2.2)

Question: How many sections did the train cover in 10 seconds?
Question: How long would it take for the train to travel all the way around the track?
Question: If Esther were to keep the track the exact same length but increased the number of 
light poles to 10, how long would it take to travel around the entire track?
Question: if Esther were to keep the distance between the light poles the same as in the original 
question, but increased the track size to accomodate 10 light poles.  How long would it take 
for the enginge to traverse the entire circle?

The Pool Deck
Chapter 1, pg 17
Curly used a shovel to dighis own swiming pool. He figured he needed a pool because digging it was 
hard and hecould se it to cool off after working on it all day.  He also planned to beuild a 
rectangular concrete deck around the pool that would be 6 feet wide at all points.  The pool is 
rectangular and measures 14 feet by 40 feet.  what is the AREA of the DECK?

Step 1: What is the question really asking of us?
In this instance we want to figure out what the area of the pool deck is.  However we don't 
actually know the measurements of the deck.  We only know the measurements of the pool and 
that the deck is 6 feet wide at all points.

Step 2: Write down what we do know about the problem.
The pool: 14ft by 40ft
the deck: 6ft wide at all points.
area of a rectangle: base * height

Step 3: Draw the problem
To draw this problem draw a rectangle with a height of 14 and a width of 40.  Then draw a larger
rectangle around the first one.  this will have a height of 26 (14 + 6 top + 6 bottom) and a width
of 52 (40 + 6 left + 6 right).  Figure 1.3.1

From here, there are multiple ways to break this problem down to answer it.

Question: can you identify at least 3 ways to do it?

First solution: break it down into sides and corners.  Figure 1.3.2
Second solution: add the corners to either the lengths or the sides.  Figure 1.3.3
Third solution: difference of areas.  

Once you have the image broken down into its consituent parts, it is simple to find the area of 
each individual part and add them all together.

Question: What is the area of the pool deck?
Question: What is the perimeter of the pool deck?
Question: Though outide the scope of this class, what would you do if the pool had an irregular shape?


Farmer Ben
Chapter 1, pg 19
Farmer Ben only has ducks and cows.  But he can't remember how many of each he has.  But lucky for him, 
he doesn't need to remember because he knows he has 22 animals, and 22 is also his age.  he also knows
that his animals have a total of 56 legs.  Because that is his fathers age.  Assuming no missing legs 
or abnormalities.  How many of each animal does Farmer Ben have?

Step 1: What is the question really asking us?
in this scenario we know that we have 22 total animals between some number of ducks and some number of
cows.  We want to figure out exactly how many of each we have.

Step 2.  What do we know?
we have 22 animals total
we have 56 legs totals
ducks have two legs
cows have 4 legs

Step 3: Draw the problem.
Start by drawing 22 circles to represent 22 animals.  figure 1.4.1.  Next since both ducks and cows have
at least 2 legs.  we can add 2 legs to all of them (currently this makes them all ducks). Figure 1.4.2.

Question:  how many legs do we currently have?

Since we currently have fewer than 56 legs, we can keep adding 2 legs, turning them into cows, until we
reach 56 total legs.  figure 1.4.3

Question: How many ducks and how many cow does Farmer Ben have?
Question: if we let X = the number of ducks, and Y = the number of cows.  And we know that X+Y = 22 total animals.
And we know that 2X+4Y=56 total legs.  Could we solve this using only algebra?

In Class Exercise:
Please complete questions 1 thorugh 4 of Problem Set A, pages 20-21.  

Homework:
Complete problems 1-3 of the 'More Practice' on pages 25-25.  The answers for these problems are in the back
of the book for you to reference.  Please note, in an academic settings, getting the correct answer is only
part of the problem.  More important is showing the process you went through to get the answer.  Especially
in this class where learning HOW to problem solve is the sole purpose.  

your assignment must be in a Github repo titled ITECH190-1
your answers must be in a .txt file
The drawings you created must be in a folder called figures

